So let's
start. Before I
introduce new topics about
designing logic circuits,
I just wanted to do another
practice or recap on the design
algorithm we did so far.
So that we can design a logic
circuit based on
SOP for the Boolean expression,
which means that sum of
products. By sum we mean
OR and by product we mean AND, so
in the SOP form we said that
we have to look at those
rows or entries in the truth
table that makes the output one.
And we write the sum of Minterms
and the each minterm is
the AND of the binary variables
and then the result of the ANDs
go through one final or operator.
We said that we can
convert or transform all the AND
and OR gates in SOP with NAND
gates by just applying double
nots on top of each other.
The second design algorithm we
proposed was product
of sum which was based on the
the product of
Maxterms. So basically the
products are the OR of the binary
variables. In the first level, we
have to OR the Binary variables
and the result of the OR gates,
goes through a final AND gate, which is
the product of the sums.
Your last lecture we said that
we can convert or transform
the POS logic circuit to have
only NOR Gates by the similar
approach with it for the
SOP, simply you have to
apply double nots on top
in order to transform all the
gates to NOR gate.
So we left it as a lecture
assignment to you, but today I'm
going to do a little practice on
that. So here
is our practice
example. Given two unsigned
numbers, X&Y, design a logic
circuits that determine whether
X is greater or equal than Y
or not. So basically, if the X,
the Binary Number X, is greater
or equal than Y, we want to
output 1, otherwise 0.
But the immediate solution would
be applying the subtraction. We
already knew that in the number
system given two unsigned
integers, we can apply the
Subtraction. If X is greater or
equal than Y, There's no need
for last borrow. The result is
positive. If X is lower than Y,
then we need to ask for a
last borrow from a
larger number in order to make
this option possible. So I mean
existence of the last borrow
indicates whether X is greater
or equal than Y or not.
However, we cannot because
we haven't learned how to
Do arithmetic such as addition
or subtraction by logic
circuits. Later we will see
how to design logic circuits to
do this: arithmetic, Subtraction.
But for now we cannot do that.
Second solution is just to
design the logic circuit for
these tasks. So like in the previous
lecture, in order to design any
logic circuits given a task, the
first question is what is the
range of input variables or
input numbers? For this task, we
are given two with numbers, X and Y,
So we have to ask what is
the range of X&Y?
Usually in the question they
say that what are
the ranges or the range of the
input variables or input
numbers? If given the input
range for the X&Y, within
each of them, they are within the range
zero and three of base 10.
The next is we have to convert
to the binary system, so if you
convert 0 and 3 to Binary, it becomes
00 and 11. So
basically each of them X&Y are
within the range of 00,
01, 10, 11: the binary
system.
So we have to pay attention that
this is the range for one
variable, one binary number, but
the other one is the same. So in
total we need 4 input variables.
2 for X and 2 for Y.
The next step is
what is the range of the output
variables in order to determine
how many output parameters we
need for our Boolean expression,
Boolean function. So in this
task we have to only output zero or
one, so we only need one boolean
expression or function,
in the range of 0, either zero
or one. So.
Here is the truth table for
that. In the left side, all the
binary variables, two of them for X as
the binary number.
Binary numbers for X and 2 of them for Y.
So then we have in the right side, the
Boolean function or expression.
We have to think to see what
entries will output
one and want entries will output
zero. For instance, the first
row. As you can see on the
binary digit 00, which is
the 0 for the X, is greater
or equal than the Y, 0. So
we have the output one.
1. 01 is equal to 1, greater than
00, which is 0. So 1 is
greater than zero, so this is 1.
So you have to check whether the
binary digit for the X is
greater or equal to one. If it
is, we have to have one.
For instance, here
we have zero in the X and
we have two. 10 means two for the
Y, so 0 is not greater equal
than two. So we have 0
For the Boolean expression.
So in the end we have the values
of 1 and 0 for all the rows in
the truth table.
Next is to choose one of the
design algorithm we have learned.
First one is looking at those
entries with value one and write
the Boolean function as the sum
of Minterms. So as we did so
for the first one in the input,
we have all zero. One thing you
have to pay attention is that when
we are writing minterms we don't
care about whether the X1 and X2
is for the binary digit X or Y1
and Y2 is for the binary digit Y.
Is it just at this
level, we just imagine we have
four input variables and say what
is the Binary digital including
all four input variables?
But the next one is there, so
this is 1. So let's go to the
this one. This one which we have
to output one because 11 is 3.
Is greater equal than 01, which
is 1. What is the minterm? The minterm
we have to pull out all of the
input variables. So the minterms
here is 0111 which is equal to
7. So we put minterm seven here. Up until this
one which is 1111, minterm 15.
Another thing is that looking at
the entries that makes the output
zero. Sometimes we
can write product of Maxterms.
So the first entry is this,
where the input binary digit is
0100, which is equal to four. So
this is the maxterm for 4 as well,
right here. The next occurrence
is here maxterm 8, maxterm 9
and then here.
Maxterm 12.
Maxterm 13, 14.
So all these are the maxterms
for the zero entries, so the
next step is now we can.
The logic circuit based on the
minterm. We can design the circuit
based on the product of maxterms.
Which one do we have to choose?
We already said that.
If you are given two or more
than two
Circuits or logic design.
The main issue is that whether
they are doing what we want or
if they have the same functionality,
we call this the
effectiveness, so we have to
check whether they are
effective or not. So as we
said, both the SOP and POS design
are both effective and does what
we are looking for.
Next step is if the designs are
effective. Next step is, I mean
comparing them in terms of
efficiency, meaning that their
speed, how many times we have or
how long we have to wait to see
the result from the time that we
input the values in the
input binary variables.
For both the SOP and POS design,
we have two levels. For the SOP
we have one level of AND and
then one level of or.
But for the POS, we have
one level of or followed
by one level of AND.
So as you can see, both design
had two levels, so
When we input the values in the
input variables, we have to wait
for two levels to see the
Results. Both also had a similar
efficiency.
So when they are equal in terms of
efficient, the next step is the
cost. Cost means that in terms
of how many guests we have to
buy to manufacture this logic
circuit. Also, I mean usually
the gates with less number of
inputs is less
Expensive, so it's better to
have gates with less number of
inputs too. So let's count
how many gates we need
for these two designs.
So for the first
design we have 10
minterms: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
So. We basically have 10
minterms, so each minterms is AND
of four variables, so we
need 10. And each AND with
four inputs. And the result of
these AND will go through
one final or. So, We need an OR
with 10 inputs.
So in total 10 + 1 = 11.
For the second design option, we
have a product of maxterms so
we have 1 2 3 4 5 6 maxterms.
Each Maxterm is the OR of binary
variables with four binary
variables. So it becomes a
6 OR gates, each or with four
inputs. And the result of these
OR gates goes to the one final
AND gate. So we have 6 OR gates.
So we need a 6 input
AND in this second level.
So in total, 6 + 1 becomes
7. So you can see that
the right side design has less.
But the not gate, We usually do
not count the number of not gates
because it's very easy
to produce the not of or
complement of a variable, but we
can consider this when the
number of ANDs and ORs are equal. Then
we can continue with counting
the number of not gates.
One hint is that.
At least here, because
although in this course when we
are in a logical design
for the digital circuits,
It is OK for us to put an OR
10 input because we already said
that we can build OR with
more than two inputs. But The
thing is in the market,
the maximum number of
inputs for OR is 4.
So if you simply just connected
10 outputs of the AND to an OR with
10 Inputs. That's OK for this
course, but if you give it to
the engineer, that engineer, should
go to the market and buy
three four-input-ORs.
Uh, because in the market we
have only four-input-ORs.
So then we have 12 inputs.
So we have 10 inputs and the
other two inputs can be filled
with zero because zero OR with
anything doesn't have an impact.
But the product of Maxterms is the
same, the 2nd and is a 6th
input and but in the market, the
maximum number of inputs for AND
gate is 4, so the engineer must
go buy two.
four-input-ANDs and so eight-inputs-AND
is available so we can use
six inputs and we can
fill the other two inputs with
1, because ANDing with one
doesn't have an input.
So clearly you can see that 6 +
2 becomes 8, here 10 + 3
becomes 13, so the second design
is much more efficient.
And here is the design that I
did in the board.
I'm sorry about that. Oh my God.
So I will. I will record this
part again so then I will
merge this part to the
rest of the video.
Sorry about that.
So let's continue.
OK, so again, so the
product of Maxterms or product of sums
is much more efficient, so we go
with this design.
So I already designed this in
the board. So basically, in
order to design this, F is the
product of maxterms for 4 to 14.
So this element is
kind of a short term to show the
multiplication. So in logic
circuit when we wanted to show
AND, we can show it by
multiplication. So this is equal
to M4 = Maxterm 4 AND Maxterm 8
AND Maxterm 9 up until Maxterm
14. As we said in the last
lecture. Maxterm 4 is equal to
minterm 4 followed by a not. So
we said that Max I is equal to
minterm I not.
So. In order
to write the maxterm 4, we
can simply think of minterm
four followed by the not. The same as
for the other Maxterms. For
instance, for the Maxterm 14, we
can write the
minterm for 14 followed by
a not. So I put the minterm
here and then apply a not on
top of each other. So this is
the minterm 4, followed by the
not, which is equal to this
maxterm four. Maxterm 4 is this.
Also this is minterm
8. 0001, and then followed by
the not, which becomes 0111 so
0111 and we OR them with each other.
Up until maxterm 14, which
is equal to minterm 14 followed
by the not. Minterm 14 is 1110. We
apply the not, it becomes 0001
which is OR with
each other. This is because of
the De Morgan's Law.
And then we can design the logic
circuit based on product of
Maxterms. So this is the first
maxterm, so this one.
X1 or X2 or Y1 bar.
Or Y2. So here
is this. X1. X2.
Y1 bar and Y2?
All OR together.
Similarly with other Maxterms
and then it goes to.
Usually in this
course it's OK if you attach all
the outputs to one AND because
here all the Maxterms are AND
with each other.
So you can simply attach all the
output of the OR gates to 1 AND
with 6 inputs.
But as I said in the market.
There's only ANDs with four
inputs, so you have to buy
Two ANDs with four inputs and
the other extra inputs you
have to fill it with one
because we are in the AND gate
and then and the result with
another and with two inputs.
This is OK for us in this
course, in the exam or any I
mean in the paper, if you want
to design the logic circuit
but be aware of this. I mean
in the market this is the kind
of engineering limitation.
So the next step is now that I
designed the logic circuit based
on these product of sums. Is it
possible to convert this logic
circuit to have a digital
circuit with only NOR gates?
We said that it is possible if
you apply a double not as the
same way. We convert the SOP to
NAND circuits. So.
Here are the steps, so F
which is the product of
Maxterms. You simply have to
apply double not.
And then bring the first not
inside this, so F is
equal to the maxterm 4, then maxterm 8
and up until maxterm 14.
Sorry. And then
if you bring this first not
inside the parenthesis, it changes
the AND to or.
And then they not comes up on
top of each maxterm, so it
becomes like this. Maxterm 4 bar OR
maxterm 8 bar OR up until Maxterm
14 bar.
And we still kept the
the second not outside the
parenthesis. And as you can see
here, maxterm 4 is this as we
saw in the previous slide
followed by the not. So this is
NOR. What was the NOR
gate? NOR gate is an
OR gate followed by the not so
we can see here that.
These binary variables are or
with each other
Followed by the not, so
this is a NOR gate.
Also here you can see that or of
the Binary variables followed by
the not, which is the Nor gate, so
each Maxterm followed by the
not becomes a NOR gate.
As you can see here.
Once the maxterm 4 is
here: X1, X2, Y1 bar
and Y2.
Or followed by the not, which is
the NOR gate. Same with other
Maxterms and then finally all
these maxterms OR with each
other, followed by the last
not. So this is another NOR,
so basically all the Max-
terms followed by the not
OR with each other and then
followed by the last not. So
this is another NOR.
But this way actually you can
convert the previous
design, which was the first
level or second level and
with again two levels, but in both
levels, you only have NOR gates.
And one hint here is that.
Although in the market you
cannot find NOR with six
inputs, but as we said in one
of the lecture assignment, the
NOR doesn't have associative
property, so you cannot simply
but. Like you cannot build the
NOR with six
Inputs. Similar to the AND.
So we already covered how we can
have an NOR gate with more than
two inputs, for instance 3 or 4
inputs. Basically, we said
that the NOR gate is an OR
followed by not. So if you
wanted to buy an NOR gate with
more than two inputs,
basically you have to buy an
OR gate with more than two
inputs followed by the not.
But this is kind of an
engineering I mean problem. As
far as this course is concerned,
this is fine for us.
So before I start the next
topic, I just wanted to.
Ask some questions from you to
make sure that you are
Following these topics. So would
you please go to this
link, this is a link
to the poll as we did in the
Some of our lectures so,
this poll has some
multiple choice questions.
So when you open the link
please, I mean let me know so that
I can start the questions.
Awesome Zack
is ready.
Taylor is
ready.
So let me start the
poll.
So the first
question is, given
a boolean function
F as a
sum of minterms
1 3 5. How many input variables
are needed to design F?
So the question. Actually the
maximum number of minterms and the
maximum minterm is M5, so it
means that. How many rows we
have in the truth table if the
maximum minterm is M5. We could
Say that I mean we have 5 input
variables, and with five input
variables, only the minterms 1,
three and five becomes one and
all other minterms become zero.
Or we could say that we can have
four variables. Or we could
have three variables, because
with three variables we can
have minterm O, minterm one up
until minterm 5.
We cannot say that we can have
two variables because the
maximum minterm with two
input variables is M3. Here we
have M5. So you could say that
at least we need 3.
Also, we can have more than
three because you might have,
for instance, four variables
from M0, M1 up until M15, but only
the minterm 1, three, and five
becomes one. Other minterms
becomes 0, so let's see the
answer.
Let me, I can
show the answer.
So.
As you can see, most of you put the
correct answer. One thing is
that most of you put the answer
for three. Correct, but you
have to pay attention to the
question. Actually in the next
question you'll see the
difference between this question
and next question. Let me go to
the next question.
Let me.
Yeah, this is the next question.
So here you see the difference.
It says the least number of
input variables. So it means
that, uh, although we can
include, I mean 4,5,6
variables, but we want to
know what's the minimum
number of input variables to
have a boolean function with
minterms 1, three and five.
That was very quick, so 21
votes. So let's see the results.
Yes, most of you actually
answered correctly. For those
who answered one, we
cannot have only one binary
variables because with one
binary variables, we can only have
minterm zero and minterm 1.
But here the Boolean function
has minterms three and five.
So with one input variables
it cannot be possible to have
a boolean function with
minterm 5.
Oh sure, let me put the.
Thank you. Thank you.
So for those that equal or more
than three, as I said in the
question, it says the least
number of inputs. So with three
inputs we can have a minterm 0, 1
up until minterm 7 so that actually
covers the minterms in the
Boolean function. So let's
go to the next question.
The next
question is.
Given four input variables,
actually we already answered
this question, so if I
have four input variables, X1
X2, Y1, Y2. What is the maximum min-
term and what is the maximum
maxterm? I mean, what is the
index, maximum index for that?
No, but I mean with four
variables, we can have two to
the 4 = 16 rows in the truth table,
so it starts from 012 up until
15. So the minterm and maxterm
start from M0, M1 up until M15.
For both the minterms and Maxterms.
So. The correct answer would
be the third one, which is
small m15 and a
capital M15. Minterm 15
and Maxterm 15.
So let's see the answer.
That's good. Yet
again, for those that I mean
answered incorrectly. Again four
input variables. We can have two to
the power of four different
rows in the truth table, so 16
rows, but it starts from
zero, so 0,1,2,3 up until 15, so M16
or maxterm 16 is not correct.
Also, the minterm and maxterm are
defined for each row so we
can have minterm one, maxterm
one. Minterm two, Maxterm
two up until minterm 15 and
maxterm 15. So let's
move to the next question.
But this is one of the nicer
questions. Usually
in terms of the I mean exams or
In the I mean lecture
assignments. It says that.
If you are given the Boolean
expression as the form of SOP, I
mean sum of minterms.
What is the quick way to figure
out the product of sums with
the other design.
So you could, I mean use the
truth table and just write
truth table in a paper and see
in what entries,
this one, this is sum of minterm 0, 1,
and other entries, the output
becomes zero and then those
entries are the maxterm. But you
can. I mean, if you imagine in
your mind, you can simply figure
out that, so if they minterm
zero is 1.
It means that it cannot be in
a product of sums. It
cannot be a maxterm in
the Boolean expression. So those
with Maxterm 0 is incorrect, so
the third one is not correct
because Maxterm 0 is 1. The
Boolean expression. However, we
say that we usually
have to put the Maxterm for
those integers with zero value.
So the third one is incorrect.
Another thing is that.
Minterm bar or not,
Minterm bar 0 is equal to Maxterm
0. So because the third option is
not correct. The fourth option
is not correct either because
Minterm
Not is equal to Maxterm. Here it says
that Minterm bar 0, which is
equal to Maxterm zero. As I said
said Maxterm 0 cannot be in the
Boolean expression because the
knew the entry for minterm zero
makes the output one.
Though the two other
options actually remains.
So as you can see from the
minterm zero up until minterm 15,
all those gaps are those entries
that makes the output 0, so
those are the values for the
maxterm, so 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14 15, so.
If you put all the
numbers, it becomes zero to 15.
These are the entries that makes
the output one. These are the
entries that makes the output 0.
So the first one is correct. But
we already knew that Maxterm is
equal to minterm followed by
the not. So maxterm four is
equal to Minterm four, followed
by the NOT.
So the correct answer is gonna be
the first two options.
First off, you actually put the
first one through, but the
answer for the second one is
also true
because based on the equation
between Maxterm and Minterm. Maxterm
I is equal to minterm. I
followed by the not.
So let's move on to the next
question. Which is this?
It says that, actually we did
this calculation in the lecture
slides just for the sake of
I mean Practice.
We are given a boolean
function as a function of
four input variables and these
are the minterms.
So how many and do we need and
how many ORs do we need and what are
the inputs of them.
So we already explained that.
These are minterms of
four input variables, so the
minterms are AND of the binary
variables and because we have
four input variables, all the
ANDs must be 4 input.
We have 10 minterms so we need
10 4-input-ANDs.
So or. Here the OR gate for
the first level is not correct,
because these are the sum of
products so we need first the
binary variables. So the first
and last option are the possible
answers. And for the last one,
the output of the AND must
go through one gate, so the first
one is correct as
I said in the market, because
we don't have the 10-input-or
we have to buy 3 4-inputs.
So the first and last one is
the correct answer.
Right most of you actually
answered correct. Thank you, so
let's move on to the next
topic, which is a new topic.
OK. Um?
So now we see two different
designs so SOP, POS. SOP Double not
becomes NAND Gate. POS double
not becomes Nor gate.
And when we are going
to choose between either of
them, we have to think about the
efficiency and cost.
Next topic is, is it possible
to still reduce the number of
states or reduce the number of
Inputs in the gates even after
using the efficient design algorithm?
Yes, it is called
Minimization, also known as
simplification.
And The thing is, because
Minimization and choosing the
efficient Digital Circuit is
very important in the
manufacturing process, that's
why there are a huge amount of
topics to apply to reduce the
number of gates and the reduce
number of inputs in the gates as
much as possible.
So these are different factors.
In order to minimize the digital
circuit and number of gates, as we
said, the less the better. Number
of inputs, less the better.
Number of interconnections. This
is another new factor as you
know. If in a small area of a
circuit you have lots of wiring,
It increases the temperature and
then it may burn the circuit.
So if we could reduce the number
of wiring in the circuit, its better.
One thing is the propagation
time. I mean this speed. As I
said, the efficiency. Difficult
after we input the value for the
input variables. By the way, we
can have the answer instead of
waiting for the answer. That
would be better.
So for instance, two level is
better than the three level,
one level is better than the
two level logic circuits.
The cost of gates in the circuit
area sometimes, you have to
minimize your circuit because
the area doesn't allow you to
put a lot of gates in that in
this circuit. But the important
thing here in this slide is that
these factors sometimes may be
in conflict with each other.
The reason is sometimes your
priority is the speed, or you
may pay for a expensive gate
because of its speed.
Sometimes, because of the cost,
you may say that if I buy 2 NAND
Gates, it is much cheaper than one
AND gate, so
You might have
More number of gates.
But less money, so
sometimes these factors are in
conflict with each other. We are
trying to, in this course we're
trying to minimize all of these,
but you have to be careful about this
conflict in constraints in
manufacturing. Oh, let's see.
What are other algorithms to
minimize or reduce the number of
gates or reduce the number of
inputs in the gates?
So there are two
methods.
The first one is
using the theorems or
postulates, or axioms in mathematics
or background in the Boolean
algebra. In this way, we say
that we can algebraically
minimize a digital circuit.
The second approach, which we will
cover next lecture is the map or
Karnaugh or is also called K-map.
So these are two methods to
reduce the number of gates or
minimize the digital circuit.
So let's just start with the
first one, which is basically
based on the Boolean algebra
and the math behind the
binary system.
Uh, although we already used all
the I mean
theory or most of the
theory or most of the postulates
about the binary system,
here is the math, I mean the
formulation behind this. And
I just want you to put more
focus on these lectures because
this is math so they need more
attention. And one thing is
that you might say that I need
practical algorithms to apply in
practice, so why do I need to know
these theorems? We already knew
how to design the logic
circuits, but I'm saying that if
you know the
Mathematical background behind
the computer science
discipline. Sometimes in some
situation it might help you
hugely. For instance, we already
knew that we need to convert the
gates to NAND gate.
If De Morgan, the
Mathematician, didn't actually
prove that the relationship
between AND and OR, for
instance (X and Y) bar is equal to X
bar and Y Bar. We couldn't do
that. So sometimes.
Mathematical theorems or
mathematical postulates has a
huge progress or contribution to
the practical design of the logic
circuits. So it is good to know
this. So in order to introduce
the Boolean algebra, we have to
define the algebra. What is
algebra? You already know most
of these concepts from the
discrete math in first or second
years of your study.
So for algebra, any structure
with three sets is called
algebra. These three sets are a
set of elements. Visually, the
elements are numeric elements,
but it could be non-numeric
elements. This is 1 set.
Second set is a set of operators
that applies on the elements of
this first set and the third set
is a set of axioms, postulates,
assumptions, or definitions.
These are all different names
for same concept, meaning that.
The definitions that we accept
true and we don't ask for the
proof, we just accept them as an
axiom, and we accept them. They
are true, and then we prove the
other theorems that based on
these axioms or postulates.
So these three sets actually
make a structure which is
called algebra.
for instance element could be
this zero and one just two
elements in the set.
It could be this minus 1 zero
and 1 three natural numbers. For
instance 123 up until Infinity.
It could be signed integers from
minus Infinity to 0 2 positive
Infinity. This is these are the
sample set up element.
Total operators could be this,
for instance addition and
multiplication, addition,
multiplication. Sometimes one
symbol is used for different
operators, for instance this
sign once it can be used for
subtraction. Also, it can be
used for negation.
Also, another operator is for instance
division. This is for instance,
sometimes you need to define
what's the behavior of the
operator. For instance, you have
say that. What do you mean by
this this symbol? This symbol in C or
C++ plus language is equal to
not. So by this I mean not
greater or equal sorry, lower,
equal or greater required, so
these are different operators
and set of operators.
operants can be divided into
different categories based on
the number of operand.
Except. Under the operand
operators are those that accept
only one operand for instance
factorial in numbering system is
an area operated so X factorial
have to put the exclamation mark
after X. So X factorial is an
honorary operator. Negation neg
X is the honorary operator not
is an honorary operator X not.
If the operator except two orpants
if we could, we can call
it binary operator so, but please do
not make mistake this binary
with the binary system and with
binary numbering system.
binary variables these are
different things, so whenever
you have two things we say, we
have a binary.
So here, because we have two
operand we say that Binary Operator.
The addition is a binary
operator. Division is a binary
operator. Power is a binary
operator 'cause it needs two
operants . Sometimes, very rarely
you can have ternary operators.
For instance, this operator X
question mark why column Z?
This operator is called Elvis
operator in C or C++ language.
We use this.
Operator in your.
Programming languages. Anyone?
Let me back here to talks.
Everyone has used
the Elvis operator.
You know why we call this
operator Elvis? The reason is
this question mark actually
looks like the Elvis Harris
. That's why in this C or C
community we call this operator
Elvis. Also in the in the third
or fourth year of your study you
will take a course called
database. The database there's
an operator called between.
Which is basically is
ternary operator except three
operand X.
Between Y&Z If X is
between Y&Z, the return is true,
otherwise the return is false.
So this is kind of ternary operator.
So an algebra has a set of
element, a set of operator.
But it also has a set of axioms
or assumptions. Georgelle was,
as I said in the previous
lectures, but the first
mathimatician and philosopher or
logician that puts all the sets.
I mean the set of elements, the
set of operators an some axioms
in order to formalize the way we
argue the way we make in our
statement true, or prove it is
true, or if falsify and
statement. So the first one
who proposes an algebra about
reasoning was George boole.
After the George boole in, 19, of
so, the judgment was 1854 that
proposes an algebra for laws of
thought. But after that
Huntington. Was the person
in 1904? Select some, I
mean axioms and Formalizes
the findings of the jewel
an officially actually.
Pioneer, the Boolean algebra but
which is called Axiomatic
Boolean algebra. By introducing
some axioms, those axioms in
his proposal was called
postulate. So the possible
Edward is the name by
Huntington, also known as axiom
on assumptions. You can read
about this more in this URL
link. Basically a postulate or
axiom or assumption is on a
statement that is taken to be
true, so we never ask about the
proof, just accepted as the
truth, but we use them in order
to prove other theorems or other
arguments or other. I mean
Boolean expressions or Boolean
equality or inequality's.
First postulate proposed
Huntington was the closure postulate
. Basically, it says that
given a set S.
And then operator.
I put this, I mean a sign. This
is called section sign, but just
to show that it should be any,
it could be any operator, so
addition, multiplication or
anything. So at general operator
we can say that the set S is
closed under this operator if.
We applied this operator on any
elements of S and the result of
the operator is belonging to. Is
it still belongs to this of
S? If the operator is an honorary
if you apply the operator on any
element of S a result of, the
operator must be. Must belongs
to the S.
If it is Binary, If I pick a
pair of elements from as the
result of the operator on the
pair of the element must be
inside the set S. That's why
we call it closed, so a set is
closed under an operator result
of the operator on the element
of S is still in the set.
So as an example, in the
sun integer Set addition,
subtraction, multiplication,
negation, factorial, all these
binary or honorary operators are
considered. I mean, as it I
mean. The the set as is
closed under the binary.
An honorary operators.
'cause the result of these
calculations are still a member
of set S.
However, power set S is
not closed under the power
operator. Why is that? The
reason is if you pick just it.
Counterexample such as two.
And minus one. So if you applied
2 to the power of minus one, it
becomes 0.5 zero. Point 5 is not
an integer, so it doesn't belong
to the set S. So the result of
the power operator operator is
not. A member of the set S
so S is not closed for the power
operator. 'cause of this
counterexample? Another word, we
can say that S is open to
with respect to this operator.
For the binary system, if they
S, is only the value zero and
one of these elements can prove
that by the truth table can say
that. The OR AND and not of
any elements in the S is still
in the set S.
So if you or zero by zero is 0.
Still here zero or one is 1 is
still in the set etc.
So we can say that the S
with two elements of 01 is
closed under the addition
OR gate AND gate or NOT
gate or not operator.
However, this set the binary
system S with the elements
around one is not closed for the
operator, the honorary, operator
negation. The reason is that we
can find a counterexample here.
If you pick one and we do
negation, it becomes minus one,
but minus one is not a member of
S. So we say that S is not
closed. Under the operate
under honorary operator negation.
Second postulate is about the
property of commutativity.
Basically, it says that first of
all it is defined is on the
binary operator. So you need a
binary operator and it basically
says that if I make a pair of
elements from the S X&Y.
And it could be any pair of
elements in the S if the order
of the operand in the operator
doesn't matter, it means that
that operator is commutative.
The set us so basically all X&Y
in the S if X operator Y is
equal to Y operator X, meaning
that the order doesn't matter,
it means that the binary
operator is commutative.
One thing is that the result
might not be in the S so
this is not a necessary
condition for commutativity to
Competitivity and closure is
too. I mean independent
postulates.
As an example, for the sign
integer set addition and
multiplication is commutative
because X + y is equal to y +
1 X also X * y is equal to
y * X.
So plus and multiplication or
addition and multiplication is
commutative on S
However, Subtraction is not
commutative in signed integers
'cause. X - y is not
equal to y - X. As a result,
this binary operator
subtraction, not commutative.
For this set of the integer
signed integers.
For the binary system with the
as equal to element of zero
and one all these operators I
mean or and, NAND, NOR, XOR,
or, XNOR are all Commutative.
Why? Because the order of the I
mean the operand or the order of
input for these operators
doesn't matter. You already
proved that for or and AND also
for non or given the truth
tables. But you at home
you can practice for
the XOR and XNOR.
So.
Yes, let me see. The
commutativity says that.
Given a binary operator.
A binary operator needs two
operands, for instance Here, X&Y from
the set S, so these are the
operand of the operator. This
is operator, so if X not
operator and then Y is equal to
Y operator X, it means that the
binary operator. This I mean
section sign is commutative.
So whenever they or I mean
the order of the input for
the operator doesn't
matter, it means that that
operator is commutative.
for instance here, as you can see
for the addition in in math,
addition of two numbers in sign
integer X + y is equal to y +
X, so it doesn't matter you
first put X and then Y or you
put first why and then x so both
result in the same value.
But I'm.
answer your question marker.
Thank you.
So the next.
The next postulate is
associativity or associative
property. Again, this is defined
for the binary operator.
Such as this and we. We can say
that a binary operator is
associative. We can only if all
XY and Z members of the S this
equation actually holds for this
equation is true. It means that.
The Order of applying the
operator doesn't matter, but it
is different from the commutativity
in the commutativity
The order of the
operand doesn't matter.
Here the order of applying the
operator doesn't matter.
Presence in the left equation
you can see that.
by parentheses we mean that we have
to apply this operator first.
Y operators Z 1st and then
you have to apply the this
operator. So X this operator the
result of the parenthesis.
But if this, I Mean Order of
applying the operator is equal
to this order.
If you apply first the left one
and then the right one.
So we can say that order of
applying operator doesn't
matter, so we can simply drop
the parentheses. So it doesn't
matter you applied this operator
first right one first and then
the left one. Or you do the you
do first the left one and then
the right one, 'cause both.
Order leads to the same
result. Can say that binary
operator is associative?
Sample is in a signed
integer, set with the binary
operators. Addition,
multiplication and
Subtraction.
You already know in math that if
you apply X + y + Z, it
is equal to X + y + Z,
which is equal to just drop the
parenthesis, doesn't matter
which. Plus with edition we do
first. Same for Subtraction and
the same for multiplication.
However. Power is not
associative.
The reason is if you pick three
elements from the set, S for
instance 2, one and three.
If you apply the right power
first here in the left equation.
So the right power here wanted
the power 3 becomes one, and
then the left power. So 2 to the
power of 1 becomes two. So the
left equation becomes 2.
However, in the right side, if
you apply the left power first
2 to the power of 1 becomes
two, and then the right power,
so it becomes 2 to the power of
three. Which is 8? So two is
not equal to 8, but the order of
applying the power operator
matters. So as a result, we can
say that the power operator is
not associative. Under the set
S as S is this signed integer.
So you can check the
associativity of OR and AND gates.
For these set zero and one.
I in Binary system we already
showed that. Many design the and
and OR gate. We said that and
with three input because the
order of the input doesn't
matter. You can simply attach
the inputs to the AND or attach
the input to the OR gate. So you
already use this. Use this
property for the design of the
ad or or get with more than two
inputs. So this is the math
behind it. So in the binary
system. for binary operator or
and and these two operators are
associative, becausw. The order
of applying the OR.
Or the order of applying
the AND doesn't matter.
4th property or postulate is
called identity. Identity
actually, this is very
intuitive, but definition is
kind of tricky.
The identity means that if you
are given a set S of.
Elements. If you could find just
one specific element, be that
one specific element E.
And let's call this
the identity element.
If you applied the operator,
this operator binary operator.
On this specific elements E.
And the other operands would
be any. Elements from the set
S. And the results actually
doesn't have any act on the X.
It means that he identity
element or has no effect or
impact on X.
So X operator identity element
is still X, so applying the
identity element doesn't have
any impact. Same wise if you
apply it from the left side, E
operator acts again doesn't have
any impact on X is still equal
to X. So then you can see
that we can say that that
specific element E is identity
element for the binary operator
section sign here.
It means that applying the
operator given the identity
element as one of the operand
doesn't have any impact.
Let's see examples of that.
fro instance in the signed integer
set. Addition for the addition,
if you add any element of S
with 0 doesn't have any impact
or any I mean influence so X + 0
is equal to 0 + X, which is
equal to X. So adding with 0
doesn't have any impact.
But the multiplication the
identity element is 1. Why is
that? Because if you apply the
operator. Multiplication. Uh,
with one for all elements of S,
the result doesn't change the
axe, so X * 1 is equal to 1 *
X, which is equal to X.
So as a result, we can say that
one is the identity element for
multiplication because it
doesn't have any impact and you
apply an element.
So. For the subtraction, the
question here is that is it
possible to have the identity?
Element for Subtraction, meaning
that if we apply the subtraction
of any element with that
identity element, the result is
it still the same I?
From the S means that X - 0 if
we say that the identity element
is 0, have to check it this X -
0 is equal to 0 - S X which
is equal to.
Is equality is not correct
because we know that X - 0 is X.
0 - X is minus X,
so these two sides of the
equation is not equal. As a
result, we cannot accept
identity element of Subtraction
is 0. If you look for other
elements, you could for instance
pick minus two as the identity,
but then you have to show that.
Minus 2 minus any other elements
doesn't have any impact, but
couldn't find that element. As a
result. We could if you try at
home you can see that.
The sign integer said there
is no identity element for
the Subtraction.
For the binary system.
Given the S 0 and one identity
element for or operator is zero,
you already knew that or in a
binary variable with 0 doesn't
have any impact. So X or zero is
equal to 0 or X is equal to X.
Also, we already knew that
anding with one doesn't have any
impact. So in in another way.
In another word, we can say
that the identity element the
and operator is 1 'cause If
you and any other elements
such as X with one doesn't
have any impact.
X and one is equal to 1 and X
which is equal to X.
The.
5th property is called inversion
or inverse. So for
this property. Ah.
We are looking for a
relationship between the element
S So for if for.
Any member of us or for all
member of S
Such such as S.
If you could find 1.
An element from other
elements. This other element
could be equal to the X, or
it could be distinct.
And if you apply the operator
binding operator such as this
and the result.
Sorry about that.
And the result becomes the
identity element of that
operator. We can say that the
relationship between X&Y is.
Uh inversion or inverse of each
other? So basically if I for
set S as I choose a random
element X and then I tried to
find other elements such as Y.
And then apply the operator.
If the result of the operator is
equal to the identity element of
that operator, we can say that
there is a relationship between
X and Y, and this relationship
is called inverse of each other.
Ann again, like this
relationship, must be
commutative. So X operator Y to
be equal to Y operator X, which
is equal to the identity element
of that operator. He usually asks. I
mean, you know the.
The other element for for instance
Y or act like this. we said
that y is the inverse of x?
Also, we can say that X
is the inverse of Y.
So by some example you can see
this more. for instance.
the signed integer set.
I've given the binary operator
addition. Can say that.
If you choose just a random
element from S put  S.
You could easily find another
element. Which is the negative
of that number?
In order to produce the identity
element of. Addition identity
element of addition is 0.
So any number plus negative of
that number is equal to 0.
So we could say that the inverse
of any number in the sign
integer set is equal to the
negative of that number.
for instance if you pick two inverse
of two is minus 2.
If you pick one, the inverse of
the one is minus one.
The reason is, if you, for
instance for the 1 ,- 1 if you
add these together becomes the
identity element of each other.
So this is 1 counterexample,
just to show that Sign
integer doesn't have inverse
property for the multiplication
operator. Multiplication
operator if we pick just number
two, we have to find another
element of S in order to
multiply 2 by that number to
produce the identity element of.
Multiplication. Identity element
of multiplication is 1, so if I
multiply 2 by what number it
becomes one number is 1/2  or
0.5. But we already knew that
0.5 is not a member of S and
the only way to produce one.
Of multiplying 2 by another
number is that that another
number must be zero point.
0.5. So this is a
counterexample that we could
find an element, but no other
elements that if you apply the
multiplication, it becomes one.
So we can say that S doesn't
have the inverse property with
respect to the multiplication.
Operator.
An interesting and exciting I
actually property of binary
system is that.
binary system S with element
of zero and one we don't have
any inverse property for the OR
operator an for the AND
operator. And this is easy to
show if you pick one.
An if you or one with.
Either 0 or either one, so there
is not gonna be one or if you
or one with anything there is
all gonna be one. However, we
need to produce the identity
element of or identity element
of or is 0.
You cannot find anywhere to
produce the identity element of
or which is 0 by oring with
one. So we could find an element
that there is no inverse element
for that the result there is no
inverse property for the OR
gate, your or operator.
The same is for the and
operator, but if you pick 0 0 and
with anything resolved 0.
However, we need to.
Is all we need to add put
identity element of the and
which is 1? So there's no way to
produce the identity element of
and by anding with zero.
So anyway, in another way, in
other words, you can say that
the binary system doesn't have
the inverse property for the OR
and AND gate Operator.
Is 6 postulate is the
distribute, distribute, tivity,
or distributive property?
And this is the definition for
the distributive property in two binary
operators. I put section, sign
and dagger sign here as general
operators. So given two binary
operators on the set S if this
equation actually is true, we
can say that.
This operator this section
sign can be distributed over
the dagger sign.
So here X.
Section sign.
y dagger sign Z . And if you
could bring the X inside the
parentheses and it becomes like
this next section sign Y?
And then X section sign Z and
these two together dagger sign.
So we could say that we could
distribute x. By the
operator, section sign,
where the dagger sign.
So when we do the distribution
from the left to the right can
say that left distributivity we
do this distribution from right
to the left we can say right
distributivity? But usually when
there is no left or right, it
means that both sides is
possible. So when we say that
the operator section sign is
distributed over dagger sign
means that in both side we can
distribute. The operator,
other one.
So.
How many minutes we have OK?
So here is
the.
He could so far with this we
just show you some postulates
and some properties of, uh, some
axioms about algebra set of a
set of elements in set of
operators, and a set of axioms.
What is Boolean Algebra? Boolean
algebra is a algebra with these
properties. set of two distinct
elements X&Y so it is not empty.
The S cannot be empty, at least
two elements must be existed in
the element, and these two
elements must be distinct.
Two binary operators. We need at
least two binary operators.
these binary operators must be
closed in the set. Also, this
binary operators must be
commutative and distributive
over each other.
also these binary operators
must have identity elements.
And the last property which was
not part of the postulates was
compliment .
It means that.
If you applied.
Two element from this set S
an applied the operator
for instance section sign. It produces
the identity element of the
other operator. So X operate
section sign? Y produces the
identity element of the daggers
operator, Same way is for the
when we apply the dagger.
Top rated X Dagger Sign y?
Produces the identity element of
the other operator.
So if this property exists in
this at the set, S can say
that X&Y are complemented each
other, and we denote the
compliment, but this not.
I mean notation.
So you can see that did not it
we use is a compliment.
In the Boolean algebra.
A compliment is away too. It's
not as we said in the binary
system, we don't have inverse
property. But we have the
compliment property, meaning
that any binary variables if we
and with each other, producers,
the. Uh, and with the X
with its complement, which is
X&X Bar becomes one, which is
the identity of the OR operator.
And also if we or the X with
X', it produces the.
I'm sorry. X and X'
becomes 0, which is the
identity element of the OR
operator. An X or x bar
produces one which is the
identity element. The and
operator.
so any algebra with these
properties is called
Boolean algebra.
I believe you are running out of
time. Yes, Sean.
Yeah, OK, so we can continue the
Boolean algebra next lecture.
We're gonna finish this next in
the next lecture and also will
introduce the karnal map.
In order to minimize the Boolean
expressions. So I'm ready for
your questions. If you have any.
No questions.
All when I ask it here,
Jenna or you wanna come to
the office hour?
You can ask it right now.
Go ahead, go ahead.
Oh, I
see, I'm.
I believe so because The
thing is, uh?
Uh, this if you couldn't provide
any evidence about why did you
submit late instance, you could,
I mean. In the.
Previous lecture assignments
they said that that was in the
maintenance period, so they
couldn't submit time.
But this is 1 eligible
Resi mean reason.
Slow Internet would be a good I
mean reason, but The thing is,
sometimes some students wouldn't
upload in the blackboard.
But they are send the submission
e mailed to me.
So they said that I mean we
cannot upload to the blackboard,
but we can send it with the
email to prove that we already.
I mean, we did before the
deadline. So you have. Do you
have any evidence that why you
didn't? Uh, submit on time.
You can provide those evidences
and then we can discuss about
that. That's a policy
unfortunately, that late
submissions or overtime
submitted receive 0.
What do you mean by I
am AO?
Not really.
I can make you present it if
you want. Can you give example
of? Compliment.
So
I'm
not
sure
I
get
in
here. This class
then.
I mean, I as I said, if
you provide some evidence.
We can accommodate
for you, but I yeah.
Otherwise. That's the policy of
the exam. Sorry about that.
ishma more.
Can you give example of
complements? Yes, actually.
Let me back to the slides.
We'll see here are later in the
next lecture I will explain
about the compliment. For
instance in the switching
algebra later as an example,
imagine we are given on a set S
with two elements zero and one.
And the operators are and and
or. OK so.
As you can see, O.
If this is X, an element of the
S said that if you could find
another element. Such that if we
apply the operator binary
operator on that it produces the
identity element of other
operator. So here for the zero
we can find another element
which is one we applied the and
operator zero and one becomes
0 0. Is the identity element of
or not and?
So this is not inverse property,
but this is compliment property.
So if we apply the and on the
elements and two distinct
elements and it produces the
identity element of other
operator can say that these two
elements. is compliments of
each other. The zero
complements.
Comp is complemented. One also
is complement of 0.
Can see here 0 is 1 compliment
for one is zero compliment
compliment is exactly the same
as the not gate.
The same is for or. If we are
given the OR operator forgiven,
zero if we are looking for a an
element for zero in order to make
it or. And produce the identity
element of other operator which
is and. So we could find 140
to zero or one becomes one is
the identity element of the
multiplication. So then we could
say that zero and one has the
complements relationship instead
of inverse relationship.
So this is 1 example in Binary
system that and then or
compliment property cause for
the element 01 if you apply the
operator he produced the
identity element of the other.
Operator.
Zero and one becomes the
identity of or zero or one
becomes the identity of and.
You're welcome. So I go to the
office hour so any of you if you
have questions, I'm ready there.
So. Thank you so much,
let me.
For all of you who are staying
the session, would you please
leave the class or I can do for
you? So if you don't mind, I
can. Thank you
Elvis.
Brandon or kitschy an AJ?
Also, if you don't mind, I'm
going to leave. I mean remove
you from the session.